---
title: As the Pirates Become CEOs - The Closing of the Open Internet
tags:
categories:
date: 2023-01-30
lastMod: 2023-01-30
---
In 2015, Hossein Derakhshan–who has been called the “grandfather” of the Iranian blogosphere–left prison after serving six years of a nineteen-year sentence for blogging, including long stretches of solitary confinement. But prison did not break him; instead, he says, what nearly broke his heart was what he found online when he started blogging again.8

After being released, Derakhshan learned that he needed to adapt to the new digital environment and use the new commercial social networks. Up for innovation and change, he created a Facebook account and posted a link to his blog. To his dismay, his post disappeared after just a few “likes.” Likes are the main currency in Facebook's all-important algorithm that decides which posts to display to other users, and which to hide. In the new world of social media, posts like Derakhshan's could disappear without being seen by more than a handful of people. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmrnxhj25t7j3tep3r9699dq))

The problem is the shift in the architecture of the Internet. In ways both dramatic and subtle, the shift has begun to create new profound and far-reaching problems. In Derakhshan's words, a link is not just a link; it is a relationship. The power of the Internet comes from our relationships on it. And these relationships are increasingly mediated by the platforms that collect data about us; make judgments about what is relevant, important, and visible; and seek to shape our experiences for commercial or political gain. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmrp3njwse5e7jw82dhwh2k6))

Legal scholar Lawrence Lessig has famously listed four forces that shape “cyberspace”: law, norms, markets, and code.13 He compared his model to the offline world where law, norms, markets, and architecture play a major role in shaping society. Lessig analogized computer code, which defines how online platforms work, to the role architecture plays offline. ... Facebook requires mutual consent to interact, while Twitter allows people to “follow” someone else without being followed back. On Facebook, friending someone requires acquiescence on both sides: the person making the request and the person accepting it. On Twitter, any public account can be followed with just a click, without having to formally ask for permission. These structures are formed through decisions made by the people who run, administer, and create the code for these platforms, and are implemented by in-house coders, resulting in different social and political environments for each service.

Advertisers, for example, discovered that when women feel “lonely, fat, and depressed” they are more likely to purchase makeup, and that such women are ideal targets for “beauty interventions.”21 In other words, women who are depressed and lonely can be more easily sold makeup. It does not take much imagination to see that advertisers will therefore want to use data gathered by online platforms to find out exactly who is feeling “lonely, fat, and depressed” and market to these targeted women at exactly these times. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmv0mcm26np1yh8dgc94tcyz))

This tendency to stay within Facebook is what gives Facebook's architectural decisions such power, and invisibly so. In one study, 62.5 percent of users had no idea that the algorithm controlling their feed existed, let alone how it worked.27 This study used a small sample in the United States, where the subjects were likely more educated about the Internet than many other populations globally, creating a potentially unrepresentatively low estimate ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmv0s04at1jer3cbvvfkmtrr))

Facebook's own research has shown the power of its designers’ architectural choices. In one Facebook experiment, randomly selected users received a neutral message to “go vote,” while others, also randomly selected, saw a slightly more social version of the encouragement, noting also which of their friends voted using small thumbnails of their profile photos. Matched with voter rolls, that single message caused 340,000 additional people to turn out to vote in the 2010 U.S. congressional elections.28 In another experiment, Facebook randomly selected whether users saw posts with slightly more upbeat words versus more downbeat ones: the result was correspondingly slightly more upbeat or downbeat posts by those same users. Dubbed the “emotional contagion” study, this incident sparked international interest in Facebook's power to shape the user's experience.29 ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmv0tbtdrcd63969eext5kg9))

The power to shape experience (or perhaps elections) is not limited to Facebook; there are other powerful platforms. For example, Google rankings are hugely consequential. A politician can be greatly helped or greatly hurt if Google chooses to highlight or hide, say, a link to a corruption scandal on the first page of its results. A recent study showed that slight changes to search rankings can shift the voting preferences of undecided voters, and that these shifts can be hidden so that people show no awareness of the manipulation.30 ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmv0v2p75bmks6yqwrw00eeh))

This was not a situation that reflected Facebook users’ lack of interest in the Ferguson protests; rather, it was an indication that it is hard to “like”–Facebook's dominant algorithmic signal–such disturbing news, while it is easy to give a thumbs-up to a charity drive. Once a topic is buried by an algorithm, this becomes a self-feeding cycle: fewer people are able to see it in the first place, with fewer still choosing to share it further, causing the algorithm to bury it deeper. On Twitter's platform, in which users see all posts from the people they follow in chronological order, the topic grew to dominate discussion, trending locally, nationally, and globally, catching attention of journalists and broader publics. On Facebook, it barely surfaced. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmv0za30nm5r7cc2exb6ydta))

The open Internet that held so much generative power took a turn toward ad-financed platforms, while the dangers lurking for ordinary users from the Internet's open and trusting design were not counteracted, causing people to flee to safer and more user-friendly platforms. In combination, these two developments encouraged, enabled, and forced the creation of massive, quasi-monopolistic platforms, while incentivizing the platforms to use their massive troves of data with the power of computational inference to become better spy machines, geared toward ad delivery, the source of their financing. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmv10q59xgjf5vpk9x25dn77))

Advertising became the default business model on the web, “the entire economic foundation of our industry,” because it was the easiest model for a web startup to implement, and the easiest to market to investors. Web startups could contract their revenue growth to an ad network and focus on building an audience. If revenues were insufficient to cover the costs of providing the content or service, it didn't matter–what mattered was audience growth, as a site with tens of millions of loyal users would surely find a way to generate revenue.36 ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmwmg02dbsx1pgxpdcr7cvbz))

While network externalities made it possible for platforms to become very large, the ad-financing model meant that a midsized platform, even one with hundreds of millions of users, faced great challenges, since ads on the Internet are not worth much.38 An ad-dependent platform can only survive if it serves enormous numbers of people. For example, Wall Street's investors have soured on Twitter because it only has about three hundred million users. For most products, hundreds of millions of users would appear to be a huge success. In an ad-financed online world, that's barely enough to get by. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmwmjbbx4vg4nbzwhgb3h29q))

Second, the Internet's commons needs tending, which will also require substantial resources and financing as well. A global system whose security depends so much on volunteer work will, inevitably, become a difficult-to-navigate, insecure, and unpleasant experience, and will result in people retreating to safer platforms that cushion the user experience while also controlling it. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmwmp43sqjv8w1as4q39bxnx))
