---
title: Blockchain and Democracy
tags:
categories:
date: 2023-01-30
lastMod: 2023-01-30
---
**11/17** - I’ve been thinking about this specifically yesterday and generally over the past couple weeks. Yesterday I was reading this [article](https://zine.zora.co/budgeting-for-all) and listening to this [podcast](https://open.spotify.com/embed/episode/6irsN5VFS8pHrYYzahUlq5?utm_source=generator) by Eli Zegler

  + The podcast and the article discussed Quadratic Voting / Funding and their uses to strengthen democracy, specifically in the context of participatory budgeting. Quadratic Funding allows people to express the strength of their preferences while also ensuring that things that people care about (that aren’t the most important thing) still get funded. Blockchain can help this happen, but the article argued that the framing of blockchain within use cases for public goods and services has to be secondary and fairly technological. The more boring blockchain seems the better as that makes people much more open to the idea.
Decentralized voting (if accompanied with a reliable proof of personhood model) can distribute power significantly enough to make leftist orgs much more accountable to every day people.
  + There’s been thinking about this in the frame of “[ImpactDAO’s](https://store.gitcoin.co/products/green-pill-book-digital-edition)” and “[regenerative cryptoeconomics](https://store.gitcoin.co/products/impactdao-book-digital-edition)” where DAO’s are viewed as the building block of the next society. The part that I really like is the emphasis on modularity and stacking of DAO’s, where if each DAO generates some positive externality and they’re all stacked together, then the positive effects get magnified. This aligns strongly with the socialist ethos of “nobody can do it alone. we all just have to do work in our own little corner and all our efforts together will lead to change”. What I dislike is that all of these fields treat community as something that can be created by designing token incentives **just** right to align every individual’s rational calculus on how to engage in the DAO. That seems a) to miss that human behavior isn’t always rational/optimal in some game-theoretic way and b) incentives to cooperate in some organization need to go beyond what can be programmed into the very human considerations of why people do things for each other.
What if unions were run as [DAO]({{< ref "/pages/DAO" >}})s? That would significantly distribute voting power away from the union leadership, and could potentially distribute the labor required to run the union back to everyday people. Some DAO-native currency that cannot be easily transferred out into USD would also mean that union bureaucracy cannot simply pay themselves higher because their compensation isn't very fungible.
Orgs like [PactDAO](https://pactdao.xyz/) that use crypto to crowdfund money for local grassroots initiatives in NYC. Orgs that put blockchain secondary to their more human goals are the ones that I think have the potential to generate any sort of “community” or facilitate real human communication.
