---
title: Entangled Life - How Fungi Make Our Worlds, Change Our Minds & Shape Our Futures
tags:
categories:
date: 2023-01-30
lastMod: 2023-01-30
---
Many of the most dramatic events on Earth have been—and continue to be—a result of fungal activity. Plants only made it out of the water around five hundred million years ago because of their collaboration with fungi, which served as their root systems for tens of million years until plants could evolve their own. Today, more than ninety percent of plants depend on mycorrhizal fungi—from the Greek words for fungus (*mykes*) and root (*rhiza*)—which can link trees in shared networks sometimes referred to as the “wood wide web.” This ancient association gave rise to all recognizable life on land, the future of which depends on the continued ability of plants and fungi to form healthy relationships. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmrj0k7h66mhhqa382tbfrnd))

Plants may have greened the planet, but if we could cast our eyes back to the Devonian period, four hundred million years ago, we’d be struck by another life-form: *Prototaxites*. These living spires were scattered across the landscape. Many were taller than a two-story building. Nothing else got anywhere close to this size: Plants existed but were no more than a meter tall, and no animal with a backbone had yet moved out of the water. Small insects made their homes in the giant trunks, chewing out rooms and corridors. This enigmatic group of organisms—thought to have been enormous fungi—were the largest living structures on dry land for at least forty million years, twenty times longer than the genus *Homo* has existed. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmrj3wnkx1bpw9msr8ywa9yy))

We all live and breathe fungi, thanks to the prolific abilities of fungal fruiting bodies to disperse spores. Some species discharge spores explosively, which accelerate ten thousand times faster than a space shuttle directly after launch, reaching speeds of up to a hundred kilometers per hour—some of the quickest movements achieved by any living organism. Other species of fungi create their own microclimates: Spores are carried upward by a current of wind generated by mushrooms as water evaporates from their gills. Fungi produce around fifty megatons of spores each year—equivalent to the weight of five hundred thousand blue whales—making them the largest source of living particles in the air. Spores are found in clouds and influence the weather by triggering the formation of the water droplets that form rain and the ice crystals that form snow, sleet, and hail. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmrjbgcynmd9ne1qfhj9rxy1))

We all live and breathe fungi, thanks to the prolific abilities of fungal fruiting bodies to disperse spores. Some species discharge spores explosively, which accelerate ten thousand times faster than a space shuttle directly after launch, reaching speeds of up to a hundred kilometers per hour—some of the quickest movements achieved by any living organism. Other species of fungi create their own microclimates: Spores are carried upward by a current of wind generated by mushrooms as water evaporates from their gills. Fungi produce around fifty megatons of spores each year—equivalent to the weight of five hundred thousand blue whales—making them the largest source of living particles in the air. Spores are found in clouds and influence the weather by triggering the formation of the water droplets that form rain and the ice crystals that form snow, sleet, and hail. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmrjbkaexp5f17k127rvbqzr))

Unsustainable agricultural practices reduce the ability of plants to form relationships with the beneficial fungi on which they depend. The widespread use of antifungal chemicals has led to an unprecedented rise in new fungal superbugs that threaten both human and plant health ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmvhdcdsevr7gmgrxfdknrq5))

Most plants, I learned, depend on fungi to provide them with nutrients from the soil, such as phosphorus or nitrogen, in exchange for energy-giving sugars and lipids produced in photosynthesis ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmvhrg655dnxwrx7saztcnqx))

Our perceptions work in large part by expectation. It takes less cognitive effort to make sense of the world using preconceived images updated with a small amount of new sensory information than to constantly form entirely new perceptions from scratch. It is our preconceptions that create the blind spots in which magicians do their work. By attrition, coin tricks loosen the grip of our expectations about the way hands and coins work. Eventually, they loosen the grip of our expectations on our perceptions more generally. On leaving the restaurant, the sky looked different because the diners saw the sky as it was there and then, rather than as they expected it to be. Tricked out of our expectations, we fall back on our senses. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmxjd3v6awejgbfewfp41qdk))

*Physarum* form exploratory networks made of tentacle-like veins and have no central nervous system—nor anything that resembles one. Yet they can “make decisions” by comparing a range of possible courses of action and can find the shortest path between two points in a labyrinth. Japanese researchers released slime molds into petri dishes modeled on the Greater Tokyo area. Oat flakes marked major urban hubs and bright lights represented obstacles such as mountains—slime molds don’t like light. After a day, the slime mold had found the most efficient route between the oats, emanating into a network almost identical to Tokyo’s existing rail network ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmxjg6sh0dgat2b0mb6729yb))

It is usually taken for granted—within modern industrial societies, at least—that we start where our bodies begin and stop where our bodies end. Developments in modern medicine, such as organ transplants, worry these distinctions; developments in the microbial sciences shake them at their foundations. We are ecosystems, composed of—and decomposed by—an ecology of microbes, the significance of which is only now coming to light. The forty-odd trillion microbes that live in and on our bodies allow us to digest food and produce key minerals that nourish us. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmz5mvy6bx4wk7nwa3p69jp2))

Many scientific concepts—from time to chemical bonds to genes to species—lack stable definitions but remain helpful categories to think with. From one perspective, “individual” is no different: just another category to guide human thought and behavior. Nonetheless, so much of daily life and experience—not to mention our philosophical, political, and economic systems—depends on individuals that it can be hard to stand by and watch the concept dissolve. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmz612yk8s2vbycc5ezdjac3))

Our microbial relationships are about as intimate as any can be. Learning more about these associations changes our experience of our own bodies and the places we inhabit. “We” are ecosystems that span boundaries and transgress categories. Our selves emerge from a complex tangle of relationships only now becoming known ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmz672dbef5km1a7pt2p4mhy))
Regardless, imagination forms part of the everyday business of inquiring. Science isn’t an exercise in cold-blooded rationality. Scientists are—and have always been—emotional, creative, intuitive, whole human beings, asking questions about a world that was never made to be catalogued and systematized. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmz6ctehegdgrjns1hazxre0))

Fungi are equipped with different kinds of bodies. They don’t have noses or brains. Instead, their entire surface behaves like an olfactory epithelium. A mycelial network is one large chemically sensitive membrane: A molecule can bind to a receptor anywhere on its surface and trigger a signaling cascade that alters fungal behavior. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn037pxzs8741083mcg21n2v))

There are two key moves by which fungal hyphae become a mycelial network. First, they branch. Second, they fuse. (The process by which hyphae merge with each other is known as “anastomosis,” which in Greek means “to provide with a mouth.”) If hyphae couldn’t branch, one hypha could never become many. If hyphae couldn’t fuse with one another, they would not be able to grow into complex networks. However, before they fuse, hyphae must find other hyphae, which they do by attracting one another, a phenomenon known as “homing.” Fusion between hyphae is the linking stitch that makes mycelium mycelium, the most basic networking act. In this sense, the mycelium of any fungus arises from its ability to attract itself to itself ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn03yv8txvfhcahgthbdmw25))

More than the architecture of roots has to change for a fungus to bond with a plant. In response to each other’s distinctive chemical profiles, signaling cascades ripple through plant and fungal cells, activating suites of genes. Both reorient their metabolisms and developmental programs. Fungi release chemicals that suspend their plant partners’ immune responses, without which they can’t get close enough to form symbiotic structures. Once established, mycorrhizal partnerships continue to develop. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn04h0mncxrgxy8fb7vctq39))

The biologist Robin Wall Kimmerer, a member of the Citizen Potawatomi Nation, observes that the indigenous Potawatomi language is rich in verb forms that attribute aliveness to the more-than-human world. The word for “hill,” for example, is a verb: to be a hill. Hills are always in the process of hilling, they are actively *being* hills. Equipped with this “grammar of animacy,” it is possible to talk about the life of other organisms without either reducing them to an “it” or borrowing concepts traditionally reserved for humans. By contrast, in English, writes Kimmerer, there is no way to recognize the “simple existence of another living being.” If you’re not a human *subject*, by default you’re an inanimate *object:* an “it,” a “mere thing.” ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn069vz2950f44azhpzqbxvd))

Truffles thrive in the disturbed environments that humans make. In Europe, truffle production plummeted during the twentieth century as the truffle-growing heartlands of managed woodland were either cleared for agriculture or abandoned and left to grow into mature forests. Neither are good for truffle production. For Lefevre, the resurgence of trufficulture is exciting because it is a way to produce a cash crop from a forested landscape and divert private capital into environmental restoration. To grow truffles, you have to grow trees. You have to acknowledge that the soil is full of life. You can’t cultivate truffles without thinking at the level of the ecosystem. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn10t40jegrv96rgjwjgdn83))

Fungi may not have brains, but their many options entail decisions. Their fickle environments entail improvisation. Their trials entail errors. Whether in the homing response of hyphae within a mycelial network, the sexual attraction between two hyphae in separate mycelial networks, the vital fascination between a mycorrhizal hypha and a plant root, or the fatal attraction of a nematode to a fungal toxic droplet, fungi actively sense and interpret their worlds, even if we have no way of knowing what it is *like* for a hypha to sense or interpret. Perhaps it isn’t so strange to think of fungi as articulating themselves using a chemical vocabulary, arranged and rearranged in such a way that it might be interpreted by other organisms, whether nematode, tree root, truffle dog, or New York restaurateur. Sometimes—as with truffles—these molecules might translate into a chemical language we can, in our way, understand. The vast majority will always pass over our heads, or under our feet. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn10xbte3a235cz5jyf837s9))

Mycelial coordination is difficult to understand because there is no center of control. If we cut off our head or stop our heart, we’re finished. A mycelial network has no head and no brain. Fungi, like plants, are decentralized organisms. There are no operational centers, no capital cities, no seats of government. Control is dispersed: Mycelial coordination takes place both everywhere at once and nowhere in particular. A fragment of mycelium can regenerate an entire network, meaning that a single mycelial individual—if you’re brave enough to use that word—is potentially immortal. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn11p6wttmexmn6pczga3e12))

Mushroom growth can generate an explosive force. When a stinkhorn mushroom crunches through an asphalt road, it produces enough force to lift an object weighing 130 kilograms. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn126459yz99g1c0bg6mvfdy))

When Olsson inserted the microelectrodes into *Armillaria*’s hyphal strands, he detected regular action potential–like impulses, firing at a rate very close to that of animals’ sensory neurons—around four impulses per second, which traveled along hyphae at a speed of at least half a millimeter per second, some ten times faster than the fastest rate of fluid flow measured in a fungal hypha. This caught his attention, but in itself it didn’t suggest that the impulses formed the basis of a rapid signaling system. Electrical activity can only play a role in fungal communication if it is sensitive to stimulation. Olsson decided to measure the response of the fungus to blocks of wood, which is food for this species.

Olsson set up the rig and placed a block of wood onto the mycelium several centimeters from the electrodes. What he found was extraordinary. When the wood came into contact with the mycelium, the firing rate of the impulses doubled. When he removed the block of wood, the firing rate returned to normal. To make sure that the fungi weren’t responding to the weight of the wooden block, he placed an inedible plastic block of the same size and weight onto the mycelium. The fungus didn’t respond. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn1325eba9900726n96wa6vm))

For Adamatzky, the point of fungal computers is not to replace silicon chips. Fungal reactions are too slow for that. Rather, he thinks humans could use mycelium growing in an ecosystem as a “large-scale environmental sensor.” Fungal networks, he reasons, are monitoring a large number of data streams as part of their everyday existence. If we could plug into mycelial networks and interpret the signals they use to process information, we could learn more about what was happening in an ecosystem. Fungi could report changes in soil quality, water purity, pollution, or any other features of the environment that they are sensitive to. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn13czjp5bv1jnnn0fknkkxv))

  + This seems like it could be plugged into [Local Farming]({{< ref "/pages/Local Farming" >}}) efforts and seems to collaborate well with the types of relationships created between [farmers and scientists in the wake of Fukushima](In Fukushima, I found a society collapsing under the weight of industrial pollution. But that’s only part of the story. I also found *toxic solidarity*. Rather than giving up, Tanizaki and other farmers have taken matters into their own hands, embracing novel practices for living alongside toxic pollution. These practices go far beyond traditional ‘farming’. They involve weaving relationships with scientists, starting independent decontamination experiments, piloting projects to create food security, and developing new ways to monitor a changing environment. Among rice fields, orchards and flower beds, novel modes of social organisation are emerging – new ways of living from a future we will one day all reckon with. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmc0nc8jnx18p97bgz5avj4c))
)

Lichens, in other words, quickly grew into a biological principle. They were a gateway organism to the idea of symbiosis, an idea that ran against the prevailing currents in evolutionary thought in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries, best summed up in Thomas Henry Huxley’s portrayal of life as a “gladiator’s show…whereby the strongest, the swiftest, and the cunningest live to fight another day.” In the wake of the dual hypothesis, evolution could no longer be thought of solely in terms of competition and conflict. Lichens had become a type case of inter-kingdom collaboration. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn3y1zx375krbak2dzyjpyst))

Lichens mine minerals from rock in a twofold process known as “weathering.” First, they physically break up surfaces by the force of their growth. Second, they deploy an arsenal of powerful acids and mineral-binding compounds to dissolve and digest the rock. Lichens’ ability to weather makes them a geological force, yet they do more than dissolve the physical features of the world. When lichens die and decompose, they give rise to the first soils in new ecosystems. Lichens are how the inanimate mineral mass within rocks is able to cross over into the metabolic cycles of the living. A portion of the minerals in your body is likely to have passed through a lichen at some point. Whether on tombstones in a graveyard or encased within slabs of Antarctic granite, lichens are go-betweens that inhabit the boundary dividing life and nonlife. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn3yaf024r57hf2wzcz25gw5))

Horizontal gene transfer changes this picture and shows bacterial genomes to be cosmopolitan places, made up of genes that had evolved separately for millions of years. Horizontal gene transfer implied, as lichens had before, that branches of the evolutionary tree that had long since diverged were able to converge within the body of a single organism. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn3ydpmdzcsxk9a128twhjvq))

In 1967, the visionary American biologist Lynn Margulis became a vocal proponent of a controversial theory that gave symbiosis a central role in the evolution of early life. Margulis argued that some of the most significant moments in evolution had resulted from the coming together—and staying together—of different organisms. Eukaryotes arose when a single-celled organism engulfed a bacterium, which continued to live symbiotically inside it. Mitochondria were the descendants of these bacteria. Chloroplasts were the descendants of photosynthetic bacteria that had been engulfed by an early eukaryotic cell. All complex life that followed, human life included, was a story of the long-lasting “intimacy of strangers.” ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn3ykbfzskvs5s5ztgxk13rf))

  + **Note**: Really makes you wonder how much of evolution is about competition instead of cooperation

It turns out that fungi and algae come together at the slightest provocation. Grow many types of free-living fungus and algae together, and they’ll develop into a mutually beneficial symbiosis in a matter of days. Different species of fungus, different species of algae—it doesn’t seem to matter. Completely new symbiotic relationships emerge in less time than it takes for a scab to heal. These remarkable findings, rare glimpses of the “birth” of new symbiotic relationships, were published in 2014 by researchers at Harvard University. When fungi were grown with algae, they coalesced into visible forms that looked like soft green balls. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn3z4zwr2kkkjp0spj251fnq))

LICHENS ARE PLACES where an organism unravels into an ecosystem and where an ecosystem congeals into an organism. They flicker between “wholes” and “collections of parts.” Shuttling between the two perspectives is a confusing experience. The word *individual* comes from the Latin meaning “undividable.” Is the whole lichen the individual? Or are its constituent members, the parts, the individuals? Is this even the right question to ask? Lichens are a product less of their parts than of the exchanges between those parts. Lichens are stabilized networks of relationships; they never stop lichenizing; they are verbs as well as nouns. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn3z7f2t3et9zprn5mdjvwex))

he ‘basic set’ of partners is different for every lichen group. Some have more bacteria, some fewer; some have one yeast species, some have two, or none. Interestingly, we have yet to find any lichen that matches the traditional definition of one fungus and one alga.” ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn3zbgsgg94e5aymbajwzf7x))

We can’t be defined on anatomical grounds because our bodies are shared with microbes and consist of more microbial cells than our “own”—cows can’t eat grass, for example, but their microbial populations can, and cows’ bodies have evolved to house the microbes that sustain them. Neither can we be defined developmentally, as the organism that proceeds from the fertilization of an animal egg, because we depend, like all mammals, on our symbiotic partners to direct parts of our developmental programs. Nor is it possible to define us genetically, as bodies made up of cells that share an identical genome—many of our symbiotic microbial partners are inherited from our mothers alongside our “own” DNA, and at points in our evolutionary history, microbial associates have permanently insinuated themselves into the cells of their hosts: Our mitochondria have their own genome as do plants’ chloroplasts, and at least eight percent of the human genome originated in viruses (we can even swap cells with other humans when we grow into “chimeras,” formed when mothers and fetuses exchange cells or genetic material in utero). Nor can our immune systems be taken as a measure of individuality, although our immune cells are often thought of as answering this question for us by distinguishing “self” from “nonself.” Immune systems are as concerned with managing our relationships with our resident microbes as fighting off external attackers and appear to have evolved to enable colonization by microbes rather than prevent it. Where does this leave you? Or perhaps y’all? ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gn3znz39024bwngy7sy2vm46))
Today, more than ninety percent of all plant species depend on mycorrhizal fungi. They are the rule, not the exception: a more fundamental part of planthood than fruit, flowers, leaves, wood, or even roots. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gnnxp2ht3jtbc9vxkm8dk83t))

Some seeds had swollen into fleshy clumps tangled up in fungal hyphae, sticky streamers that trailed out into the dish. Inside the developing roots, hyphae raveled into knots and coils. This wasn’t sex: Fungal and plant cells hadn’t fused and pooled their genetic information. But it was sexy: Cells from two different creatures had met, incorporated each other, and were collaborating in the building of a new life. To imagine the future plant as separable from the fungus was absurd. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gph1s3xaerntzcqffqhn5g77))
