---
title: Hyperconnected Culture and Its Discontents
tags:
categories:
date: 2023-01-30
lastMod: 2023-01-30
---
Digital abundance is a mixed blessing: exhilarating, yet flattening and homogenizing. Culture is converted into “content” that blurs together as it flows through the same conduits and across the same interfaces in an endless stream. As we struggle to keep abreast of the accelerating flow of content, drawn by the perpetual lure of the new, we come to know less and less about more and more. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gp5cypsrqmvyab9yr1vrfjye))
The digital media scholar Jean Burgess has [identified](https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/edit/10.4324/9780203127711-4/iphone-moment-apple-brand-creative-consumer-jean-burgess) a key tension in technology design between “usability” and “hackability,” the former emphasizing “easy access to a predetermined set of simple operations” and the latter open-ended manipulability and scope for “complex experimentation.” TikTok and many other digital tools and platforms encourage broad participation by making them extremely easy to use. ... Truly democratizing cultural creativity, one might argue, would promote the development of skills and capacities rather than minimize the need for them.
  + **Note**: 1. I think there's a middle ground that can be struck here with high-level API's that make things easy to use but access to lower-level API's for more customizability 2. I wonder if this leads to a sort of "cultural deskilling" where the ease of producing ready-made content leads to an inability to critique cultural forms 3. I think the first reaction to a call to avoid this form of deskilling (and to enable complexity) would be an argument for how this reduces accessibility. I wonder how much we've conflated accessibility with ease of use.

It is misleading then to argue that cultural circulation has been democratized. The means of circulation are algorithmic, and they are not subject to democratic accountability or control. Hyperconnectivity has in fact further concentrated power over the means of circulation in the hands of the giant platforms that design and control the architectures of visibility. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gp5dr8qbn3g5evzxek12dsj3))

Vigorously participatory curatorial subcultures certainly exist, but in practice, they require too much time and energy to have a broad appeal. People enjoy sharing their discoveries with friends, and they may at least occasionally rate and review items. But most people, most of the time, leave the hard work of curation to others — or to algorithms. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gp5e352m1n1nwxbb43k0426c))

  + **Note**: I wonder how this affects the [Community Digital Gardens]({{< ref "/pages/Community Digital Gardens" >}}) idea where users have the responsibility of finding where to plant an idea, linking it to other ideas, etc

But popularity cannot be the sole criterion of cultural democratization. Just as the democratization of creativity would enable people to develop their skills and capacities, so the democratization of consumption would enable them to develop their tastes, interests and knowledge. A democratic cultural politics would be developmentalist — oriented to learning, growth and discovery — rather than presentist. All kinds of [resources](https://www.openculture.com/) made available by digital hyperconnectivity could support such a developmentalist cultural politics. But the algorithms that feed us what we like or register what is popular — and thereby performatively [amplify](https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/edit/10.4324/9781315658698-9/trendingistrending-algorithms-become-culture-tarleton-gillespie) that popularity — are oriented to the here and now. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gp5e84kgzjv82yf9yd4ndwef))

Of course, this is not specific to the digital economy; it is an abiding feature of capitalism, understood as a system not only of satisfying, but also generating wants. To the extent that preferences are endogenous — shaped by the systems that claim simply to respond to them — the satisfaction of preferences cannot serve as an independent normative standard. When algorithms that are portrayed as responding to our desires are in fact tuned to optimizing (and thereby monetizing) our “engagement” with the platform, the resultant pattern of cultural consumption is anything but  
democratic. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gp5e9ajvmncjyazhy1k8nswe))
