---
title: I Write the Songs
tags:
categories:
date: 2023-01-30
lastMod: 2023-01-30
---
The beauty is its algorithm is so efficient that its interest graph [TikTok’s database of which users are interested in what] can be assembled without imposing much of a burden on the user at all. It is passive personalization, learning through consumption. Because the videos are so short, the volume of training data a user provides per unit of time is high. Because the videos are entertaining, this training process feels effortless, even enjoyable, for the user. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gp6zdtawy9cw72tz8qweq84g))

Apologists for TikTok often tout how fun it is. ... Fun, as I interpret the word, is not just a synonym for having a good time; it’s an “aesthetic category,” in Sianne Ngai’s sense of the term, that captures a structure of feeling peculiar to the way capitalism subjectivizes us. It indexes the degree to which our capacity to experience pleasure has been subsumed by consumerism. ... It conceives of pleasure as a commodity, as an end that can be abstracted from its means. It presumes — or rather prescribes — a sense of time as a uniform emptiness, a blankness that must be filled with various prefabricated chunks of spent attention. “Fun” is when we defeat boredom; being bored by default is fun’s prerequisite.

  + **Note**: The reference to consumerism and fun is instantly just associated with "going out" for me. That falls into this aesthetic category of consumerist pleasure because it feels like we're told that going out is supposed to be fun and a release valve but it's not fun sober - we have to drug ourselves into a state that's more conducive to experiencing this kind of fun ... This description of time also reminds me of the way that time is described in Bullshit Jobs as an abstraction. If we defined time in by the content of our activities or in relation with nature, it's difficult to conceive of time as blank. It only becomes "blank" when it becomes a structure independent of life, and thus needs to be filled with various activities

Broadcasting the self is less a matter of self-expression than the possibility to engage with ourselves as a media object. “Broadcasting” can be seen not so much as a practice but a state of mind brought on when experience and mediation seem interchangeable, an attitude that treats attention not as a condition of communication but its outcome, its product. The broadcast mentality is not contingent on having a big audience; rather what is significant is that you can be an audience to yourself. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gqdm3vq3qq4nye8cxzs0fkf7))

  + **Note**: This makes a lot of sense when Instagram posts are user-optimized less as a reflection of user thoughts/feelings/activities and more as a process in seeking viewership and likes. Posting random, meaningful things on Instagram may be more authentic self-expression but often gets fewer likes, and that is because these types of content are less supported by Instagram's form. As a result, they are less legible to the audience as well, whose expectations of Instagram content is shaped more by Instagram itself than their desire for social connection. Hiding the number of likes on IG seems a lot less important when it is still the most important metric for those who post to check whether their post is successful.

In [“Why the Next Song Matters: Streaming, Recommendation, Scarcity,](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/twentieth-century-music/article/why-the-next-song-matters-streaming-recommendation-scarcity/B2584C7C27DB8314121F4B45049EDEC2)” Eric Drott details this process with respect to recommendation algorithms in music streaming services like Spotify. He traces their shift from marketing themselves on their seemingly infinite databases (*listen to whatever you want!*) to their purported ability to serve up the “perfect song” (*here’s something you didn’t know you could want this much!*). This parallels TikTok’s promise to provide the content that users “want.” Streaming platforms, Drott argues, sell customers on fulfilling not a lack but the lack of a lack. They claim to solve the “scarcity of scarcity” that the digital surfeit has supposedly brought on. This is a familiar trope across tech companies: They have brought us access to so much goodness, to such a “consumer surplus,” that they now need to spoon-feed what’s good to us. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gqdmh3svya72nh745sfq5tgk))

  + **Note**: This also reminds me of the Tyranny of Convenience article where the investment of work into expressing preferences is almost what makes those preferences more valuable/individual. When everything is convenient, what becomes harder is realizing what you value because regardless of whether you value something (a genre, a song, etc) or not, it is easily within reach.

Given the effort that wanting new things requires, it makes sense that we would become susceptible to systems that can do our desiring for us. Algorithms don’t reflect existing needs or wants; they are a system for instilling new ones. So opening TikTok or Spotify or Netflix is typically not a way to watch something specific but a place to turn when you want to want something. Their algorithms produce a sense of having been “satisfied” without having to have first been deprived or lacking, and without having to make the effort of bringing one’s desire into a sharper focus. They make desire an inert consumer good, available on demand as already enjoyed. When you consume an algorithmic feed, you are constituted as a subject who is continually winning at wanting. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gqdms90z7p8c6f0tmfnpnmqb))

Algorithms play their part by replacing social interaction with data processing. What others do is presented to us directly as what kind of content we should want. Stiegler understands this sort of content as a mediatized “exteriorization of memory and knowledge” that allows consumers to be “controlled by the cognitive and cultural industries of control societies.” Media products replace our lived experience and reprogram our relation to memory, gesture, and pleasure — standardizing and “grammatizing” them, working against our capacity to individuate ourselves as Stiegler believes is our human destiny. The result of this process is what Stiegler labels “systemic stupidity” — or what I am calling the invention of “fun.” ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gqe17d0hzr4t5jh0fkd21t1c))
