---
title: The Cybernetic Sex Worker
tags:
categories:
date: 2023-01-30
lastMod: 2023-01-30
---
Missing from this historical narrative of the internet, however, is the role sex workers have played in its development. The sex worker has always been a major stakeholder in telecommunications. As Melissa Gira Grant notes in *Playing the Whore*, ‘Prostitution is a communications technology. It signals.’ The term ‘call girl’ most explicitly exemplifies this, coined when city brothels were some of the first establishments to install telephone lines. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmq60c6js36ewjnk59gwsv1a))

Substantial documentation places sexual labour as the driver of mass communications technology. In *The Erotic Engine,* journalist Patchen Barss directly links the distribution of sexual material to the development of communications technology, including photography, home video and cable TV. ‘Pornographers’, Barss contends, ‘were the technological pioneers who figured out how to make money from a new medium before the mainstream saw any profit potential.’ Money made in the erotic market of 1980s proto-internet bulletin board systems (BBSs) literally paid for the material infrastructure that paved the way to the Web, as consumer demand for pornography and video games fuelled the push for better computer graphics, faster processing speeds and greater data bandwidths. All this made internet ubiquity a possibility. From there, a thread spinning at the rate of Moore’s Law weaves adult content creators into the pattern of innovation towards the popular internet. They were also the first to invest in designing protocols for commercial search engines and livestream video, and to secure third-party payment processing. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmq624f6qn2ngn7y005gkp0a))

In this ad-based surveillance economy the entire experience of the internet is one of being taxonomised and prodded, pried into for information, and subjugated to the ideals of a hegemonic system. Benjamin exemplifies this through her description of the digital character, ‘a digital profile assessed to make inferences regarding character in terms of credibility, reliability, industriousness, responsibility, morality, and relationship choices’. Benjamin traces how marketplace lenders follow the digital footsteps of these characters – their social media activity, transaction histories, location data – to determine a person’s creditworthiness. But assessed according to which standards? As Benjamin explains, these technoscientific designs are informed by hegemonic norms and standards historically defined within the context of white male supremacy, thus perpetuating deep, discriminatory disparities along race, gender and class lines. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmq69hb96b19p4f22szqynkr))

Worse yet, through algorithmic content moderation software, the sex worker has become an object model on which surveillance technologies are trained. By proving that they can target and weed out society’s chosen ‘deplorables’ with precision, walled-garden platforms advertise their ability to meticulously extract and classify user data, a desirable feature for companies that want to push users towards their products. These technologies parallel – and inform – technologies for predictive policing, protest surveillance and migration control. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmq6bavrx6fxm6z7bb174pbx))

In a sick twist, Big Tech has figured out how to pimp the entire world, both using and discarding the sex worker in the process. This parallels Ruha Benjamin’s overview of carceral technologies that end up applied to civil society. What is built on the premise of ‘protecting the public’ only first affects the marginalised before bleeding into the general population, reproducing social hierarchies and reinforcing biases along the way. Key issues such as data surveillance and censorship that sex workers have been calling out have finally begun to have traction. Documentaries such as *The Social Dilemma* and *The Great Hack* are finally mainstreaming conversations about the devastating damage to society caused by surveillance economy platforms. But how much harm could have been avoided if we listened to what sex workers had been telling us years before? ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmq6cmak0jnt7dzrs39y7efk))

Gentrification is often sold to the public as making the streets ‘safe’ but the question is, for whom? Schulman duly notes that neighbourhood ‘safety’ comes at the expense of its original inhabitants, for whom the neighbourhood is now dangerous. Grant connects sex work’s movement into the private sphere to this quashing of public life, which occurred through crackdowns on deviant sexual behaviour in semi-public spaces in order to make room for real estate and private interest development. ‘Through zoning and through fear-fueled bias, sexually oriented businesses have been isolated from “legitimate” businesses’, which Grant notes were simply ‘neighbors’ among ‘sites of labor – theaters, food carts, camera shops, shoe shine stands, hustlers’. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmq6fws5j8bctvzrwrvf1ykt))

Immoral behaviour was criminalised under the false pretence of saving (white) women from the presumed horrors of coerced sexual labour. In *The Virtues of Unvirtuous Spaces,* Alexandra Levy writes how the legislation based on this surveillance, codified finally as the Mann Act (known then as the White-Slave Traffic Act), was ‘aimed at combating “trafficking in women,” but… was actually used to punish against all kinds of heterodox sexual practices, including miscegenation, polygamy, adultery, and promiscuity’. Besides the horrifically racist enforcement of this law on consenting interracial couples, the ‘slavery’ from which it promised to save (white) women left no room for sex work as a choice, whether it be the more lucrative alternative to underpaid female industrial labour, the consenting means by which someone got passage to the US, or a matter of basic survival. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01gmq6hvepcaqkrabt312jdvkx))
